# Do Criminals Respond to Incentives? Evidence from the three strikes law

In 1994, California, along with twelve other states enacted the three strikes law. The three strikes law was part of the Department of Justice’s Anti-Violence Strategy1. The law required that criminals that had committed one severe violent felony, as well as two other previous convictions, must serve a mandatory life sentence in prison. The logic of the law is simple, by greatly increasing the marginal cost of crime, we should expect to see a decrease in crime. In the case of the three strikes Law, it is particularly trying to dramatically increase the marginal cost of additional crime, and thus dissuade repeat offenders. After its initial implementation in 1994, many other states followed in adopting the three strikes law. By the beginning of 2019, 25 states, and the federal government have active three strikes laws.

With such widespread implementation of the three strikes law, we should expect that it is effective in reducing crime. However, there are 25 states who have not adopted the three strikes law, and many politicians, lawyers, and private citizens who steeply oppose the three strikes law on the basis that it is not effective in decreasing crime or decreasing recidivism. The basis of the belief that the three strikes law is ineffective is that crime, particularly serious and violent crime, are committed irrationally, often in an act of anger. Essentially, opponents of the Three Strikes law assume that the perpetrators are not acting rationally, and are likely not doing a cost benefit analysis when committing a serious or violent felony. Thus, a strategy that works to increase the marginal cost of crime may be ineffective. The fact that half of the United States uses the three strikes law, while the other half does not, is a clear indicator that there is some disagreement about its effectiveness.

This research looks to investigate the reality of the effectiveness of the three strikes law. We look at its effectiveness in two different types of crime: i) violent crime, and ii) property crime. In addition to splitting crime into these two different types, we also look at sub categories within each type. Because under the three strikes law, a third strike of any of the felonies within all of our categories would lead to an equally sever 25 to life sentencing, we can conclude that the marginal cost of any third strike offense is essentially the same. Therefore, any discrepancy in the effect of the Three Strikes law on different types of third strike felonies can be interpreted in two ways, either the marginal benefit of one crime is higher than another, or a perpetrator is acting less rationally when committing a certain type of crime. In looking at the effect of the three strikes law on certain types of crime, we are attempting to observe the level of rationality associated with certain types of crime, and if perpetrators of certain crimes react to incentives with different levels of rationality than others.
